6.046J | Design and Analysis of Algorithms
============================================================

Syllabus | Design and Analysis of Algorithms | Electrical Engineering and Computer Science | MIT OpenCourseWare Browse Course Material Syllabus Calendar Instructor Insights Meet the Educator Video Playlist Lecture Notes Lecture Videos Recitation Notes Recitation Videos Assignments Exams Course Info Instructors Prof. Erik Demaine Prof. Srini Devadas Prof. Nancy Lynch Departments Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Mathematics As Taught In Spring 2015 Level Undergraduate Topics Engineering Computer Science Algorithms and Data Structures Computer Networks Cryptography Mathematics Applied Mathematics Learning Resource Types grading Exam Solutions grading Exams co_present Instructor Insights notes Lecture Notes theaters Lecture Videos assignment_turned_in Problem Set Solutions assignment Problem Sets theaters Problem-solving Videos Download Course menu search Give Now About OCW Help & Faqs Contact Us search GIVE NOW about ocw help & faqs contact us 6.046J | Spring 2015 | Undergraduate Design and Analysis of Algorithms Menu More Info Syllabus Calendar Instructor Insights Meet the Educator Video Playlist Lecture Notes Lecture Videos Recitation Notes Recitation Videos Assignments Exams Syllabus Course Meeting Times Lectures: 2 sessions / week, 1.5 hours / session Recitations: 1 session / week, 1 hour / session Prerequisites This course is the header course for the Theory of Computation concentration. You are expected, and strongly encouraged, to have taken: 6.006 Introduction to Algorithms 6.042J / 18.062J Mathematics for Computer Science Petitions for waivers will be considered by the course staff. Students will be responsible for material covered in prerequisites. Course Description This course assumes that students know how to analyze simple algorithms and data structures from having taken 6.006 . It introduces students to the design of computer algorithms, as well as analysis of sophisticated algorithms. Course Objectives Upon completion of this course, students will be able to do the following: Analyze the asymptotic performance of algorithms. Write rigorous correctness proofs for algorithms. Demonstrate a familiarity with major algorithms and data structures. Apply important algorithmic design paradigms and methods of analysis. Synthesize efficient algorithms in common engineering design situations. Course Outcomes Students who complete the course will have demonstrated the ability to do the following: Argue the correctness of algorithms using inductive proofs and invariants. Analyze worst-case running times of algorithms using asymptotic analysis. Describe the divide-and-conquer paradigm and explain when an algorithmic design situation calls for it. Recite algorithms that employ this paradigm. Synthesize divide-and-conquer algorithms. Derive and solve recurrences describing the performance of divide-and-conquer algorithms. Describe the dynamic-programming paradigm and explain when an algorithmic design situation calls for it. Recite algorithms that employ this paradigm. Synthesize dynamic-programming algorithms, and analyze them. Describe the greedy paradigm and explain when an algorithmic design situation calls for it. Recite algorithms that employ this paradigm. Synthesize greedy algorithms, and analyze them. Explain the major graph algorithms and their analyses. Employ graphs to model engineering problems, when appropriate. Synthesize new graph algorithms and algorithms that employ graph computations as key components, and analyze them. Explain the different ways to analyze randomized algorithms (expected running time, probability of error). Recite algorithms that employ randomization. Explain the difference between a randomized algorithm and an algorithm with probabilistic inputs. Analyze randomized algorithms. Employ indicator random variables and linearity of expectation to perform the analyses. Recite analyses of algorithms that employ this method of analysis. Explain what amortized running time is and what it is good for. Describe the different methods of amortized analysis (aggregate analysis, accounting, potential method). Perform amortized analysis. Explain what competitive analysis is and to which situations it applies. Perform competitive analysis. Compare between different data structures. Pick an appropriate data structure for a design situation. Explain what an approximation algorithm is, and the benefit of using approximation algorithms. Be familiar with some approximation algorithms, including algorithms that are PTAS or FPTAS. Analyze the approximation factor of an algorithm. Textbook The primary written reference for the course is: Buy at MIT Press Cormen, Thomas, Charles Leiserson, et al. Introduction to Algorithms . 3rd ed. MIT Press, 2009. ISBN: 9780262033848. [Preview with Google Books ] In previous semesters the course has used the first or second edition of this text. We will be using material and exercise numbering from the third edition, making earlier editions unsuitable as substitutes. Lectures and Recitations You are responsible for material presented in lectures, including oral comments made by the lecturer. You are also responsible for material presented in recitations. Attendance in recitation has been well correlated in the past with exam performance. Recitations also give you a more personalized opportunity to ask questions and interact with the course staff. Your recitation instructor, together with the lecturers, will assign your final grade. Grading Policy The final grade will be based on the problem sets, two evening quizzes, and a final given during final exam week. The grading breakdown is as follows: ACTIVITIES PERCENTAGES Problem Sets 30% Quiz 1 20% Quiz 2 20% Final Exam 30% Although the problem sets account for only 20% of your final grade, you are required to at least attempt them. The following table shows the impact of failing to attempt problems: QUESTIONS IMPACT 0 None 1 1/100 of a letter grade 2 1/10 of a letter grade 3 1/5 of a letter grade 4 1/4 of a letter grade 5 1/3 of a letter grade 6 1/2 of a letter grade 7 One letter grade 8 Two letter grades 9 or more Fail the course Please observe that this table is for questions skipped, not problem sets . Collaboration Policy The goal of homework is to give you practice in mastering the course material. Consequently, you are encouraged to collaborate on problem sets. In fact, students who form study groups generally do better on exams than do students who work alone. If you do work in a study group, however, you owe it to yourself and your group to be prepared for your study group meeting. Specifically, you should spend at least 30–45 minutes trying to solve each problem beforehand. If your group is unable to solve a problem, talk to other groups or ask your recitation instructor. You must write up each problem solution by yourself without assistance, however, even if you collaborate with others to solve the problem. You are asked on problem sets to identify your collaborators. If you did not work with anyone, you should write “Collaborators: none.” If you obtain a solution through research (e.g., on the web), acknowledge your source, but write up the solution in your own words. It is a violation of this policy to submit a problem solution that you cannot orally explain to a member of the course staff. No collaboration whatsoever is permitted on quizzes or exams. Plagiarism and other dishonest behavior cannot be tolerated in any academic environment that prides itself on individual accomplishment. If you have any questions about the collaboration policy, or if you feel that you may have violated the policy, please talk to one of the course staff. Although the course staff is obligated to deal with cheating appropriately, we are more understanding and lenient if we find out from the transgressor himself or herself rather than from a third party or discover it on our own. Course Info Instructors Prof. Erik Demaine Prof. Srini Devadas Prof. Nancy Lynch Departments Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Mathematics As Taught In Spring 2015 Level Undergraduate Topics Engineering Computer Science Algorithms and Data Structures Computer Networks Cryptography Mathematics Applied Mathematics Learning Resource Types grading Exam Solutions grading Exams co_present Instructor Insights notes Lecture Notes theaters Lecture Videos assignment_turned_in Problem Set Solutions assignment Problem Sets theaters Problem-solving Videos Download Course Over 2,500 courses & materials Freely sharing knowledge with learners and educators around the world. Learn more © 2001–2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology Accessibility Creative Commons License Terms and Conditions Proud member of: © 2001–2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology You are leaving MIT OpenCourseWare close Please be advised that external sites may have terms and conditions, including license rights, that differ from ours. MIT OCW is not responsible for any content on third party sites, nor does a link suggest an endorsement of those sites and/or their content. Stay Here Continue